First draft on "doesnt look good to me" code review post. (#212)
MechanicalRock/mechanicalrock.github.io: _posts/2022-02-28-dont-lgtm-code-reviews.md

---
layout: post
title: Doesn't look good to me — a requiem for thorough code reviews
date: 2022-02-28
tags: code cloudnative consultants deployment continuous-delivery devops patterns review software test testing
author: Simon Bracegirdle
image: img/dont-lgtm-code-reviews.jpg
description:

>   Do you give a cursory review and "LGMT!" on pull requests? Read this to find out how you could bring more rigour to your code review practices and improve the software you deliver.

Reviewer: do you give a cursory glance and hastily slap the trusty "LGMT!" comment on pull requests?

Reviewer: I feel you could add some spice here

---

![Header](/img/dont-lgtm-code-reviews.jpg)

> A lot of development teams are doing code reviews these days, it's become the industry norm. But are they done well? The idea of the lazy code review — "LGTM, ship it" — has [become a meme](https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/lgtm), and it's funny because there's an element of truth in it that we've experienced ourselves.

Reviewer: is so prevalent it has become a meme?

Let's be honest though, when we're working towards deadlines, it's easy to deprioritise or simplify what we see as low priority tasks to ensure we can meet our commitments. This isn't malicious or lazy, it's human nature.

What's the solution then? There's no quick fix of course — it comes down to individuals and teams, and how much value they place in the benefits of code review. But even if you value code reviews highly, you still need a disciplined, well articulated and well understood approach to overcome the habits of individuals and sustain a high level of review quality over time.

> In this post i'll take a small step to convince you of the value of thorough code reviews and I'll provide some pointers for bringing rigour and methods to increase the value you get out of them.

Reviewer: I'll

Reviewer 2: You've buried the lead here.

The first paragraph is your hook - your opportunity to get the reader interested to keep reading.  Would it be better to move this up to the first paragraph?

```suggestion
A lot of development teams are doing code reviews these days, it's become the industry norm. But are they done well? The idea of the lazy code review — "LGTM, ship it" — has [become a meme](https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/lgtm), and it's funny because there's an element of truth in it that we've experienced ourselves..  In this post I aim to convince you of the value of thorough code reviews and I'll provide some pointers for bringing rigour and methods to increase the value you get out of them.

Let's be honest though, when we're working towards deadlines, it's easy to deprioritise or simplify what we see as low priority tasks to ensure we can meet our commitments. This isn't malicious or lazy, it's human nature.

What's the solution then? There's no quick fix of course — it comes down to individuals and teams, and how much value they place in the benefits of code review. 
```

This gives a nice lead into the meat of the post: how you can give me the answers to all my problems!

Lets explore the rationale...

### Reason 1 — Learning opportunity

Code reviews present an opportunity to learn something for both reviewer and the reviewee. Here's some examples:

- As a reviewer, you may learn about the behaviour of an upcoming feature that you had some assumptions about, which turned out to be wrong.
- As a reviewee, you may receive some suggestions about how to improve error handling that results in code with less bugs.
- As a reviewer, you're confused about the code structure, so you ask a question about it and learn about a new approach.
- As a reviewee, you may ask the reviewer of what they think about the expected behaviour in the tests you've written, they may present some feedback and ideas.

Code reviews should be a conversation, and conversations happen to be a good tool to achieve common understanding between two or more individuals.

But this isn't a guarantee. We need to build the habit of asking good questions, providing suggestions and other forms of feedback that move code reviews from a chore into a conversation. Reviews with a reasonable attention to detail and tactful use of language will have this benefit.

> Furthermore, this learning opportunity is critically important when one of the participants is more senior than the other. Seniors have a responsibility to provide guidance to their less experienced peers, and code reviews are an opportunity to do so.

Reviewer: feels like there's a nod to psychological safety that is not made here

### Reason 2 — Product quality

Thorough code reviews can lead to higher code quality, and code that is more maintainable and robust will allow the sustained delivery of a higher quality product.

A good reviewer will look for issues that impact the robustness, security or performance of the system. For example; an error that is not handled could cause a catastrophic bug that leads to data loss or a system outage, both of which would be a poor experience for users.

Nobody is perfect and having a second set of eyes can pick up potential issues that we missed ourselves during development. A fresh perspective can have a different view on the code than yours after a tiring development stint. Everyone brings with them a different set of experience and a different world view, leverage that to get the most out of your reviews.

Even if the change under review doesn't directly have any bugs in it, but is missing tests, or has bad naming, or is hard to understand, it could lead to bugs in future changes when confused developers try to understand what's going on.

### Reason 3 — Sustained delivery over time

> If we deliver more maintainable, secure and robust code, in the long run it means we spend less time fixing issues and by extension — more time delivering value to customers. 

Reviewer: love the point but dont like the wordiness of this sentence

> For this reason, code reviewers should look for changes that might deter from these goals.

Reviewer: dont know if deter is the right word in this context, "work against"?

For example; if tests are not added to a change, then it might make it hard to enhance or fix that code next time, it becomes worse if the developer is new and unfamiliar with the intended purpose of the code.

Small paper cuts add up over time to form what is now well known as technical debt. Code bases that have accumulated enough technical debt can exceed a threshold of no return, beyond which they become unmaintainable messes that everyone's scared to touch.

> To control the fallout of tech debt, management often bring in manual gates and other heavy approval processes to attempt to limit the damage of any changes. This increases the lead time on changes and reduces the frequency that we deliver to customers.

Reviewer: This increases the time needed to make changes (lead time) and reduces...

If you're working on a system that needs to continue to serve real customers for the foreseeable future, play the long game and optimise for testability, maintainability and changeability. Code reviews are a critical tool to help sustain that discipline over time.

### Aside — Why not do code reviews?

As with everything in software, there is no universal laws, practices that are useful in some cases are harmful in others. Code reviews are no exception — they aren't necessarily suitable for every situation and team.

Here are some cases where you wouldn't do code reviews and why:

- You are experimenting or prototyping, in which case code quality is not a concern. Be careful that your prototype doesn't become a production application overnight. Ideally throw away any prototype code and start again.
- You are a one person show and don't have a team. You have no choice here unless you can afford to bring on another person.

Okay, with those points aside and assuming you're interested in code reviews, let's look at some approaches for adding rigour.

> ## How can we improve our code review approach then?

Reviewer: - then

### Approach 1 — Review in context

Most teams use Git these days and so the popular process for code reviews is to create a feature branch and then open a pull request from that feature branch back to the main line. In git platforms such as GitHub, BitBucket and GitLab, the pull request is where the code review takes place.

Most code review tools emphasise the "diff" view, which highlights the files and lines of code that have changed in the branch when compared to the main line. This is a fantastic tool as it makes it clear what the contents of the change are.

But the "diff" view doesn't always tell the whole story and could be missing important context.

For example, if you make a one-line change to the returning statement of a function, what's missing in the diff view is how the callee of that function is interacting with the return value. Without seeing the full picture, you could miss a side effect leading to a bug.

> Opening the change in an IDE can help to provide the bigger picture of the impact of a change. Using IDE intellisense features you can drill into referenced objects.

Author: Yeah agree that there's a bit of extra context switch. I think the decision whether that's worth it comes down to the nature of the change e.g. for complex changes, or if the context itself is complex, or you want to look around to get a better understanding. I personally find the expanding diffs to be frustrating to use, although useful in certain situations.

I would argue the IDE is a native code review tool itself now -- e.g. you can press the `.` key in GitHub files and get a full IDE for that branch instantly.

<img width="2978" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60430071/156277180-1227b58c-4466-4a0a-9fd8-995ebb3d496a.png">

What I get if I press `.` in this PR ^

> Opening the change in an IDE can help to provide the bigger picture of the impact of a change. Using IDE intellisense features you can drill into referenced objects.

Author: will clarify my points in the text

Tooling in this space is always improving. In 2021 GitHub released https://github.dev, which allows you to open up any repository in a web-based Visual Studio editor with the press of the `.` button in a GitHub repository.

### Approach 2 — Use of language and tone

> 

Reviewer: maybe a comment about actively seeking out feedback if you're not getting it?

Code reviews are a great opportunity for feedback, but if you're not careful they can also be a source of arguments, defensiveness and frustration. We've all experienced it, I'm guilty of it too.

> It's understandable, it's hard receiving critical feedback on work we've put a lot of effort into, and are under pressure to deliver. If we feel like a reviewer is being overly harsh or difficult, we naturally go into defensive mode.

Reviewer: harsh, difficult, pedantic

I think it's critical that the reviewer makes careful choice of words when giving feedback. The reviewee has this responsibility too, but the reviewer is the one that sets the initial tone.

> Thankfully, there is an approach that can help us — [conventional comments](https://conventionalcomments.org/). Conventional comments helps by prefixing a label to each comment posted by a reviewer. The prefix describes the intent of the comment. For example; "`question`: could you explain the intent behind this function?". By prefixing an intent to a comment, it helps to provide insight into the motivation behind the comment and belay our fears of harshness.

Reviewer: this is interesting!

Sticking to the checklist changes that, it helps the reviewer to drive the discussion and maintain a high standard if you remain disciplined over time. Even after we've been doing reviews for a long time, and we've internalised the checklist, we're human and can forget considerations. The checklist helps us to be consistent.

I've defined my own personal code review checklist, and identified four key areas that I think are critical:

- Testability
- Maintainability
- Security/privacy
- Robustness

Below is my full checklist, based on what I think is important, and also inspired by [other checklists](https://github.com/mgreiler/code-review-checklist) out there. If you're looking to adopt a checklist in your team, I suggest you use one that encapsulates the properties your team thinks is important. There's plenty of [good checklists](https://github.com/mgreiler/code-review-checklist) around the web to use as source material.

> #### Simon's Code Review Checklist

Author: Yeah probably worth mentioning additional considerations in specialised situations e.g. UI, API design (openAPI specs ) etc

- [ ] Are there any opportunities for abuse? E.g. large volume of requests? Bad input?
- [ ] Are all entry points authenticated and authorised appropriately?
- [ ] Does any process, resource or user have more access than they need?
- [ ] Is all PII and sensitive data handled appropriately (not logged, not in plain text, not checked in)
- [ ] Are all third-party dependencies vetted and pinned?

**Robustness**

If your code is secure and maintainable, that's a good start. If it's constantly falling over in production or riddled with bugs, it's going to result in a poor user experience and frustrate the team. These questions focus on robustness concerns:

- [ ] Can you think of any errors or conditions that would cause an unexpected state?
- [ ] Are there any statements that won't scale well to large data sets?
- [ ] Is there anything that can have an impact on system load / service limits / costs?
- [ ] Are all read and write operations logged to assist debugging and support?
- [ ] Are error messages readable and assist debugging and support (e.g. shows key non-sensitive details)?

> ### Approach 4 — Get consensus on approach

Author: Yeah, "things that should be automated instead of reviewed"
